well welcome to you all
welcome to those here in the Great Hall
to those in the common Center to those
in Queens where we are live-streaming
this evening welcome to you all and
particularly of course welcome to Nome
as we know him Noam Chomsky Noam Chomsky
needs no introduction so I'll be very
very brief he's of course probably the
one academic who is known throughout the
world for his scholarship and public
engagement currently immerses professor
in the Department of linguistics and
philosophy at MIT know was born in
Philadelphia in 1928 and has worked for
nearly all his career at one institution
where he started in 1955 there's loyalty
mit sometimes described as the father of
linguistics he's also a major figure in
the philosophy of mind language politics
and ethics he was named the world's top
public intellectual by one poll but we
hardly needed reminding Noam has written
over a hundred books and has made
massive contributions of course to the
fields in which he's engaged for years
he's been one of the most prominently
cited academics he is lectured in many
of the most prominent lecture series of
the world and now he can add the Dharam
Castle lecture series to his list his
list of awards and honors is
extraordinary
and one hardly knows where to start I
counted honorary degrees from at least
38 of the most distinguished
universities in the world in Germany
this would be a nightmare because of the
tradition and convention of introducing
important speakers by all of their
degrees so it'd be welcome here
professor doctor doctor doctor doctor
till you get to 38th among his most
impressive honors at least impressive to
me that I could find was a newly
described species of bee that has been
named after him
his talk surviving the 21st century will
be for about 3540 minutes or so and then
we will take questions from here and
also from the other lecture theatres
which will somehow arrive on my iPad
again to remind you hashtag Chomsky if
you wish to tweet it's an incredible
pleasure to have you here and please
join with me in giving Noam Chomsky a
better welcome than he's ever had before
[Applause]
when I think about the announced title
will we survive the 21st century there's
an irresistible image it's the image of
the proverbial lemmings marching towards
the cliff cheering their intrepid
leaders as we should all be aware for
the first time in history humans are now
poised to destroy the prospects for
decent existence and much of life the
rate of species destruction right now is
about at the level of 65 million years
ago and when a huge asteroid hit the
that the earth entered ended the age of
the dinosaurs opened the way for the
proliferation of mammals the difference
is that today we're the asteroid and the
way may well be open to beetles and
bacteria when we've concluded our work
the geologists break the history of the
planet into IRA's of relative stability
Pleistocene lasted several million years
followed by the Holocene about 10,000
years ago that coincided with the
introduction of Agriculture and now
geologists are adding a new era a new
epoch the Anthropocene beginning with
the Industrial Revolution roughly 200
years ago the and it has radically
changed the natural world and the light
of the pace of change one hates to think
about when the next epoch will begin and
what it'll be one effect of the
Anthropocene is the extraordinary rate
of species extinction another's the
threat to ourselves
no literate person can fail to be aware
that we're facing a prosper
of severe environmental disaster effects
they were already detectable and that
might become dire within a few
generations if current tendencies are
not reversed just to give a few examples
a couple of weeks ago two leading
scientific journals published a new
study of the West Antarctic Ice Sheet
it's long been understood that if it
collapses it will lead almost inevitably
to a rise in global sea level of at
least 10 feet within a few generations
wipes out civilization in any
recognizable form the reports the new
studies reported that it is collapsing
leading scientists who are familiar with
the study warned that continued release
of greenhouse gases will almost
certainly make the situation worse
destabilizing other parts event art as
well as the Greenland ice sheet causing
many of the world's coastal cities to be
abandoned with horrifying consequences
for the poor inhabitants of coastal
plains and probably millions in
Bangladesh alone the leading done us
scientific society the triple-a s which
is usually quite conservative that did
issue a study a few days earlier
reporting I'm quoting it the
overwhelming evidence of human-caused
climate change with both current impacts
and extraordinary future risks to
society and natural systems the report
expressed particular concern over
quoting again the disconnect between
scientific knowledge and public
perception they're talking about the
United States and that's not an accident
the leading sectors of the business
world are quite openly running a major
propaganda
campaigns to convince the public that
humans are not responsible for global
warming if it's occurring at all some of
the leading business journals like The
Wall Street Journal Forbes responded to
the latest IPCC report with the article
saying that the real problem is global
cooling and there's some effect there
are recent studies that show the polling
studies that show that concern about
global warming in the United States is
well below the global norm and it's
stratified among Republicans it's far
below the global norm among Democrats
slightly below and that's not untypical
of the contemporary Republican Party
which is no longer a conventional
parliamentary party as a more accurate
description that was given by one of the
very few remaining genuine conservatives
the respected political analysts of the
right-wing American Enterprise Institute
Norman Ornstein he describes the former
Republican party as a radical insurgency
which has pretty much abandoned the
domain of parliamentary politics and
although he didn't add this we can say
that the reason is that's in virtual
lockstep service to extreme wealth and
privilege and one aspect of this is
denial of climate change or at least the
human role in this terrifying
development the current issue of the
premier journal of media criticism the
Columbia Journalism Review has an
interesting article about this topic it
attributes this outcome to a media
doctrine that's called fair and balanced
thus if a journal publishes an opinion
piece reflecting the opinion of 97
percent of scientists that has to run
alongside
the piece counter piece expressing the
claims of the energy corporations so the
public's ends up confused and that is
indeed what happens but there's
certainly no doctor and a fair and
balanced know this if a journal say runs
an opinion piece that denouncing Putin
once again for the criminal act of
taking over Crimea
it surely does not have to run a piece
along sided pointing out that while this
act is indeed criminal Russia has a far
stronger case than the u.s. does in
having taken over southeastern Cuba over
a hundred years ago including Cuba's
major port rejecting the demand of Cuba
since independence to have it returned
with no justification at all unlike the
Russians only the justification that
this contributes to the fifty year
program of terrorists warfare which was
quite extreme and economic strangulation
of Cuba and there are quite a few other
current cases but they don't have to be
mentioned under the doctrine of fair and
balanced so there is an actual media
doctrine it has to be fair and balanced
when the concerns of concentrated
private power are involved as surely not
elsewhere but although obvious enough
this cannot be perceived in the elite
culture so it appears there's no much
exuberance in the United States about
what's called a hundred years of energy
independence lying ahead as we become
the Saudi Arabia of the next century
President Obama overrated about the
matter with his usual eloquence two
years ago quote him he proclaimed with
pride to animal applause that now under
my administration America is producing
more or
than at any time in the last eight years
that's important to know over the past
three years I've directed my
administration to open up millions of
acres for gas and oil exploration across
23 different states we're opening up
more than 75% of our potential oil
reserves resources offshore that we've
quadrupled the number of operating rigs
to a record high
we've added an enough new oil and gas
pipeline to encircle the earth and then
sum up lifting the applause that tells
us something important about our social
and moral malaise the president was
speaking in Cushing Oklahoma that's an
oil town as he announced in creating his
appreciative audience in fact it's the
oil town it's described as the most
significant trading hub for crude oil in
North America and industry profits are
sure to be secured in the short term as
producing more oil and gas here at home
and the president's words will continue
to be a critical part of energy strategy
that's the president promised let's go
to the media a couple of weeks ago the
New York Times published an energy
supplement eight pages mostly euphoria
about the bright future for the United
States and poised to be the greatest
producer of fossil fuels the missing in
the eight pages is any reflection on
what kind of world were exuberantly
creating that one might recall George
Orwell's observation in his unpublished
introduction to Animal Farm about how in
free England ideas can be suppressed
without the use of force not least
because immersion in the elite culture
having a good education
instills the understanding that there
are certain things it wouldn't do to say
or we can add even to think in the moral
calculus of contemporary anglo-american
state capitalism profits and bonuses in
the next quarter that greatly outweigh
concern for the welfare of one's
grandchildren well much remains
uncertain we can assure ourselves with
fair confidence that future generations
will not forgive us for our silence and
our apathy we might in fact wish to
consider a remarkable paradox of the
current era there are some who are
devoting themselves seriously to try to
avert impending disaster in the lead or
the most oppressed segments of the
global population those considered to be
the most backward and primitive the
indigenous societies of the world First
Nations in Canada aboriginals in
Australia tribal tribal people in India
and others like them and in countries
with influential indigenous populations
like Bolivia and Ecuador there are by
now even legislative proposals
legislative recognition of Rights of
nature the government of Ecuador
actually proposed to leave their
supplies of oil in the ground where they
should be if the European countries
would provide them development aid
amounting to a small fraction of what
they would sacrifice by not exploiting
their oil resources and of course the
European countries refused they didn't
bother asking the United States while
indigenous people are trying to avert
the disaster in sharp
contrast the race to the cliff is led by
the most advanced educated wealthy
privileged societies in the world
notably North America others not far
behind few exceptions like Germany but
not many unless there's a significant
change of course and soon the prospect
for decent survival is quite slim and
that's not all for the past 70 years
we've been living under the threat of
incident and virtual virtually total
destruction at our own hands those
familiar with the shocking record and if
you're not too familiar with it I urge
looking at it but those familiar with it
and the record continues to the present
would find it hard to contest the
conclusions of the General Lee Butler
he's the last commander of the Strategic
Air Command which has responsibility for
nuclear weapons
he writes that we have so far survived
the nuclear age by some combination of
skill luck and divine intervention and I
suspect the latter in the greatest
proportion it's actually a near miracle
that we've escaped destruction so far
and the longer we tempt fate the less
likely it is that we can hope for divine
intervention to save us from our folly
in this context it's worth taking a
close look at the factors that drive
policy there is a receive standard
version it's common to academic
scholarly discourse public discourse
diplomatic commentary so I'll just quote
a few leading figures but it's almost
universal it takes a George Kennan one
of the creators of the modern world
him government is created to assure
order and justice internally and to
provide for the common defense coming to
the present and the current issue of the
journal national interest leading
realist scholar that John Mearsheimer
formulates the doctrine as holding that
the structure of the international
system forces countries concerned about
concerned about their security to
compete with each other for power
leading scholar of US Middle East policy
William quanto long diplomatic
experience writes that the driving force
of US policy is to ensure security and
well-being of the population and so on
pretty much endlessly we can put aside
the standard Pyatt ease about justice
and well-being of the population what is
emphasized throughout is concern for
security which sounds plausible enough
but there's a few unanswered questions
for example security for whom well one
answer is security for state power now
there are many illustrations of that so
take current one from a couple of days
ago the United States agreed and this is
unusual to support a Security Council
resolution calling on the International
Criminal Court to investigate war crimes
in Syria but there was a proviso no
inquiry is will be tolerated into
possible war crimes by Israel or of
course by the United States
that's the explicit proviso and it's
routine the United States is uniquely
self immunized from the international
legal system it's a very interesting
topic I don't have time to pursue it but
it does illustrate the importance of
protecting the security of the state
security of state power
to protect the security of state power
from home
well enemies of course but who are the
enemies it turns out that one prime
enemy is the domestic population that
fact is demonstrated over and over very
clearly recently very clearly quite
generally by government secrecy as it
very rarely has a genuine security
motivation that much should be familiar
to anyone who's plowed through
declassified documents and almost never
find anything related to genuine
security it it but there is a fact the
effect is to keep the population in the
dark the enemy they have to make sure
they don't know what's going on and
they're good reasons some of these were
explained by the professor of the
science of government I was like that
title the professor of the science of
Government at Harvard Samuel Huntington
prominent the rural scholar government
adviser he instructs us that the
architects of power in the United States
must create a force that can be felt but
not seen power remains strong when it
remains in the dark exposed to the
sunlight
it begins to evaporate that was in 1981
that when the Cold War was again heating
up and Huntington went on to explain
that you may have to sell intervention
or other military action in such a way
as to create the misimpression that it's
the Soviet Union that you're fighting
that's what the United States has been
doing ever since the Truman Doctrine of
1947 1981 was another critical year in
this regard it was the year when
Reagan declared the first war on terror
plague of the modern age returned the
barbarism in our time etc etc and ever
since then particularly after the
disappearance of the Russian threat or
temporary disappearance as a concocted
ogre terror you have to create the
misimpression that its terror that
you're fighting there are other
candidates narco traffickers crazed
mullahs number of others all of this is
rarely acknowledged but it's very
accurate and it's a good insight into
state power and policy has plenty of
reverberations right to the present
moment so state power that surely has to
be secured from dangerous enemies like
the domestic population but in sharp
contrast the public is not secure from
state power
the first striking illustration of that
right now
President Obama's current radical attack
on the Fourth Amendment of the US
Constitution which quoted protect
citizens from unreasonable search and
seizure that protects their the privacy
of their persons homes papers and
effects the defense of this right in
Boston helped spark the American
Revolution that's why it was written
into the Constitution into the Bill of
Rights at that time the tyrant was the
British government and now the tyrant is
the American government of course
referring to the extraordinary
surveillance campaign Obama's
surveillance campaign which seeks to
monitor everything without exception
that you say or do and anyone connected
in any way to the electronic culture
cell phone
computer the landline is vulnerable to
this inquiry and Britain agrees the
government remains tyrannical the
British government does perhaps you know
authorized the United States National
Security Agency actually requested it
and quotes to analyze and retain any
British citizens mobile phone and tax
numbers emails and IP addresses that are
swept up in the NSA dragnet which is
colossal picks up essentially everything
you should also be happy to know that
the NSA routinely
receives or intercepts the routers
servers computers other computer network
devices that are being exported from the
United States so that it can implant
surveillance tools make sure that the
NSA knows every keystroke you're making
and presumably China does the same which
kind of exhausts the range all of this
is justified by security in accord with
the standard doctrine but it's worth
remembering that the claim to of
justification for security carries no
information whatsoever literally even
the technical sense it's completely
predictable for virtually all actions of
states when they're caught in some crime
or malfeasance and if something's
perfectly predictable it simply carries
no information in the case of the
Snowden revelations the first reaction
of the US government was the reflexively
security of the president the head of
the NSA informed the public that
numerous terrorist plots were stopped by
these surveillance methods and that
first the claim was 54 were stopped that
was later reduced to a dozen
there was later a government commission
established which investigated exactly
how many had been stopped and it turned
out that was one somebody sent $8,500 to
Somalia that so far as the total yield
of this colossal effort to monitor and
control the population the domestic
enemy
there is another concern security for
private power of major current
illustration are the huge trade
agreements that are now being negotiated
during specific and transatlantic their
secret but not completely they're not
secret to the hundreds of corporate
lawyers and lobbyists who are writing
the detailed regulations you can guess
what they are and why they're secret
there are other illustrations throughout
the Snowden documents one of the
interesting parts of them is that they
reveal extensive economic espionage in
the interests of US corporations
actually when this is brought to the
attention of the government they say
well we don't choose particular
corporations which is correct it's just
the general corporate sector that has to
be whose security must be protected by
state intervention well there are other
examples there actually too numerous to
mention and they shouldn't be surprising
because one a recent study just came out
from Princeton University two leading
political scientists Martin gilens
Benjamin Page who studied hundreds of
policy decisions and conclude with very
careful analysis all quote economic
elites and organized groups representing
business interests have substantial
independent impacts on US government
policy while average citizens and
massbay
interest groups have little or no
independent influence these results they
say provides substantial support for
theories of economic elite domination
and for theories of biased pluralism but
not for theories of majoritarian
electoral democracy or majoritarian
pluralism to put it simply it's a
pretense that we live in democracies
there plutocracies other work by these
and other scholars particularly Martin
gilens has shown pretty convincingly
that in the United States about 70
percent of the population the lower 70
percent on the income scale have no
influence at all on policy that's one of
the reason why most of them vote why
bother
doesn't matter what they think as you
move up the scale you get a little more
influence and at the very top which
means a fraction of 1% basically that's
where policy is written so it's not
surprising that the security of private
interest is a major commitment of of the
state and this is this goes way back
there's nothing new about it it's
getting kind of grotesque by now but
those far back the closest most careful
inquiry into this is done by for a good
political scientist Thomas Ferguson
University of Massachusetts he studied
the effect of the relation between
campaign spending and policy choices
back into the 19th century and it turns
out it's an extremely good predictor
take a look at the distribution of
campaign spending you can pretty well
predict the policies that will be
enacted this runs right through the New
Deal as very few exceptions actually
there was a over a century ago the most
prominent in American history the most
prominent campaign manager Mark Hanna
around the turn of the 19th century was
asked
but what are the most important things
that are necessary for running a
campaign and he said there are three the
first ones money the second ones money
and I forgotten what the third one is
that was well over a hundred years ago
now it's well beyond nevertheless it's
useful to have a new and very careful
confirmation by Gillan's and Paige
effects that are so obvious that in a
free society they'd be taught in
elementary school well if the United
States is actually an unusually free and
open society in a number of respects
crucial ones and one of them relevant
here is the accessibility of internal
state records secret records
Declassified and they provide a very
revealing account of the actual motives
of state policy fortunately no time to
review the matter here but there are a
few persistent themes we find
consistently that one major driving
factor in policy choices is concern
about what Henry Kissinger called
viruses that spread contagion he was
referring specifically to a n days Chile
which threatened to spread the contagion
of a peaceful parliamentary path towards
independent development than social
welfare you know the outcome in that
case and it's duplicated in case after
case throughout Latin America and
Southeast Asia Africa and the Middle
East it's the most prominent theme of
Cold War history in general there's
ample evidence that security of state
power crucially security from the
population and security of concentrated
economic power private power that these
are driving forces in
policy formation the furthermore that's
entirely natural and to be expected when
you look into how policy is formulated
of course it's not quite that simple
there are some interesting cases some
quite current in fact when these
commitments conflict it's interesting to
see what happens in those cases but this
is an extremely good first approximation
and radically opposed to the received
standard doctrine what your thought and
what you read well let's turn to another
question what about security the
population it's very easy to demonstrate
that this is at most a marginal concern
of policy planners so take two very
prominent examples who I mentioned
global warming and nuclear weapons both
dire threats to the security of the
population turned the state policy in
both cases it systematically attempts to
accelerate the threat in the interests
of its primary concerns protection of
state power and protection of
concentrated private power of namely the
power that largely sets determined state
policy in the case of global warming the
conclusion is too obvious even the Terry
on so I'll drop it but it's quite
instructive to see that even instant
destruction by nuclear weapons has never
ranked high among the concerns of state
authorities the record reveals that
quite quite clearly
let me run few through a few examples
start in the early days of the Atomic
Age around 1950 at that time the United
States was overwhelmingly powerful that
enjoyed remarkable security there was
nothing like it in history it controlled
the Western Hemisphere and pro-growth
oceans controlled the opposite sides of
both oceans had half the work
wealth just incomparable power and
security actually there was a potential
threat ICBMs with hydrogen bomb warheads
they didn't exist at the time but it was
potential threat there is a standard
scholarly review of nuclear policies
that's undertaken access to high-level
sources declassified documents by
McGeorge Bundy he was the national
security adviser for Kennedy and Johnson
administration's former Harvard Dean and
he writes that quote him the timely
development of ballistic missiles during
the Eisenhower administration the 50s is
one of the best achievements of those
eight years yet it is well to begin with
a recognition that both the United
States and the Soviet Union might be in
much less nuclear danger today if these
missiles had never been developed and he
that adds an instructive comment he says
I am aware of no serious contemporary
proposal in or out of government that
ballistic missiles should somehow be
banned by agreement so in short there
was apparently no thought of trying to
prevent the sole serious threat to the
United States the threat of instant
water destruction and this striking fact
merits barely a phrase in this massive
standard comprehensive history and it's
also passed unnoticed well could it have
been prevented can't be sure of course
but there are some indications that it
might have been possible one suggestive
indication is remarkable proposal by
Stalin in 1952 he offered to permit
Germany to be unified with free
elections which of course the communist
lose but on condition one condition that
it not joined a hostile military
alliance that's hardly an extreme
condition if you look at the history of
the preceding half century Stalin's
proposal was ignored or ridiculed but
recent scholarship has begun to take a
different view especially with the
release of Russian archival records
there's a bitterly anti-communist
Harvard scholar Adam alum leader Mullah
specialist on the Bolshevik period he
takes the status of Stalin's proposal to
be an unresolved mystery he writes that
Washington wasted little effort in
flatly rejecting Moscow's initiative on
grounds that were embarrassingly
unconvincing leaving open the basic
question was Stalin genuinely ready to
sacrifice the newly created German
Democratic Republic East Germany on the
altar of real democracy with
consequences for world peace and for
American security that would have been
enormous that remains an open question
that one of the most prominent cold war
scholars of Melvin Lafleur has reviewed
recent research and Soviet archives and
he writes that many scholars including
him were surprised to discover that the
Lavrentiy Beria the sinister brutal head
of the secret police proposed that the
Kremlin offer the West a deal on
unification and neutralization of
Germany agreeing to sacrifice the East
German communist regime to reduce
east-west tensions and of course him for
them improve internal political and
economic conditions opportunities that
were squandered in favors by the West in
favor of securing West German
participation in Nate
under the circumstances actual
circumstances is not the propaganda ones
it's not impossible that agreements
might have been reached what would have
protected the security of the population
from the gravest threat on the horizon
instant total destruction but the option
the possibility was apparently not
considered recognized but dismissed or
ridiculed
it's another indication of how slight a
role authentic security plays in state
policy contrary to standard doctrine as
actually that was revealed again
repeatedly in the years that followed
couple years later in Nikita Khrushchev
took office he understood that Russia
could not compete militarily with the
United States the richest most powerful
country in history incomparable
advantages if Russia hoped to escape its
economic backwardness and the
devastating effect of the second world
war he concluded it would be necessary
to sharply reverse the arms race and he
in fact proposed sharp mutual reduction
in offensive nuclear weapons the
incoming Kennedy administration
considered the offer and rejected it it
turned instead the rapid military
expansion as a review of this by one of
the most respected IR international
relations scholars Kenneth waltz
recently died he wrote that the Kennedy
administration undertook of the largest
strategic and conventional peacetime
military buildup the world has ever seen
even as first chef was trying at once to
carry out a major reduction in the
conventional forces and to follow a
strategy of minimum deterrence and we
the United States did so even though the
balance of strategic weapons greatly
favored the United States
again decisions that harm national
security harm the security of the people
and while enhancing state power a major
Kennedy as you may recall barely
squeaked to victory in 1960 in the
election mainly by fraud but one of the
ways he squeaked to victory was his
charge that the opponent Eisenhower and
Nixon had permitted the Russians to leap
ahead and offensive weaponry that
creating what was called a missile gap
that severely threatened US security and
that frightened the population the
reality was the United States was far in
the lead the Russians actually had four
operational ICBM which were exposed to
attack tiny fraction of the u.s. Arsenal
that was recognized by the Kennedy
administration McGeorge Bundy National
Security Adviser speaking for the
administration
he explained that they had nevertheless
been right in emphasizing a fake missile
gap and the reason he gave was that the
phrase had a useful shorthand effect of
calling attention to our basic military
posture the namely the posture of
rapidly expanding the overwhelming US
dominance and threat while rejecting
security and the prospects for survival
normal there was a Soviet reaction it
was to place missiles in Cuba in October
1962 that move was motivated as well by
Kennedy's quite immense a huge terrorist
campaign against Cuba was very serious
and it was scheduled to lead to invasion
in October 1962 as Russia and Cuba may
will have known that brought us to what
historian Arthur Schlesinger called the
most dangerous moment in history and it
was extremely dangerous
the crisis peaked in late October 1962
over 26 27th Kennedy then received a
letter or secret letter from first RUF
offering to end the crisis by
simultaneous public withdrawal of
Russian missiles from Cuba and US
Jupiter missiles from Turkey
these were obsolete missiles for which
withdrawal order had already been given
because they were being replaced by much
more dangerous and timing the vulnerable
pull our submarines so that was the
author offer Russia would remove the
missiles from Cuba the US would continue
to remove missiles which are already
being withdrawn because they're being
replaced by more dangerous ones
Kennedy's subjective estimate was that
if he refused the probability of nuclear
war would be 1/3 to 1/2 that's a war
that would have destroyed the northern
hemisphere
according to Eisenhower President
Eisenhower's warning Kennedy refused
it's hard to think of a more horrendous
decision in history and worse he's
greatly praised for it for his cool
courage his statesmanship 10 years later
Henry Kissinger called a nuclear alert
it was the last days of the 1973 Israel
Arab War and there was a purpose the
purpose was to warn the Russians not to
interfere with his delicate diplomacy
diploma yet was carrying out delicate
diplomatic maneuvers which were designed
to ensure an Israeli victory in the war
but a limited victory so that the United
States would still remain in total
control of the region unilaterally and
the maneuvers were delicate the United
States and Russia had jointly imposed a
ceasefire but Kissinger turned
had secretly informed Israel that they
could ignore the ceasefire therefore
there was a need to call a nuclear alert
to frighten the Russians away the
security of the population had its usual
status zero ten years after that the
Reagan administration came in and they
launched operations to probe Russian air
defenses that meant simulating air and
naval attacks calling the highest level
nuclear alert into Russian waters and
territory and these were taken at a very
tense moment right at that time pursing
two strategic missiles had were being
deployed in Europe a few minutes flight
time to Moscow Reagan had announced the
Star Wars program SDI at which the
Russians understood to be effectively a
first-strike weapon that's a standard
interpretation of so-called missile
defense on all sides and other tensions
were rising well naturally these actions
caused considerable alarm in Russia
unlike the United States Russia is quite
vulnerable repeatedly been invaded and
practically destroyed actually that led
to a major war scare in 1983 newly
released archives Russian archives
revealed that the danger was much more
severe even then historians of the
nuclear interactions had previously
assumed
there's a recent CIA study which is
called the war scare was for real it
concluded that US intelligence had
underestimated Russian concerns and the
threat of a Russian reaction these
exercises I'm quoting almost became a
prelude to a preventive nuclear strike
an account in the recent issue of the
journal of Strategic Studies and it
turns out it was even more dangerous
than that
we learned that last September the BBC
reported that right in the midst of
these really world threatening
developments that Russia's early warning
systems detected an incoming missile
strike from the United States sending
off the highest level automated alert as
a protocol for Soviet military same with
the US and that is to retaliate at once
with a nuclear attack of its own can't
wait any longer there was an officer on
duty miss Donna Slav Petrov and he
decided to disobey the orders and not to
report the warning to his superiors he
received an official reprimand and
thanks to his dereliction of duty we're
around to talk about it
security of the population was no more a
priority for Reagan planners than for
their predecessors and that continues
until the present even putting aside the
numerous near catastrophic accidents
which are really quite shocking they're
reviewed in a chilling new book by Eric
Schlosser plans for the future are
hardly promising congressional US
Congressional Budget Office just
reported that the US nuclear arsenal
will cost 350 billion dollars over the
next decade and that costs of expanding
and modernizing it will quadruple from
1924 to 1930 there's a detailed study
about the center for nonproliferation of
the Monterey Institute for International
Studies estimated the US will spend a
trillion dollars on the nuclear arsenal
in the next 30 years as they put it
that's a percentage of the military
budget comparable to spending for
Precure
of new strategic systems in the 1980s
under President Ronald Reagan and of
course the u.s. is not alone as general
Butler observed it's a near miracle that
we've escaped destruction so far and the
longer we tempt fate the less likely it
is that we can hope for divine
intervention to perpetuate the miracle
in the background is a legal obligation
that has determined by the World Court
that the nuclear powers undertake
good-faith efforts to eliminate nuclear
weapons
well that's far in the background legal
obligations are not for the powerful
this review only scratches the surface
there are numerous other ways to
evaluate the conventional doctrines
about the goals of policy the forces
that shape policy decisions I think if
you inquire into the minutes quite worth
doing you'll find that they converge in
the conclusions that I just mentioned
quote Gillan's and page again policy is
largely set by economic elites and
organized groups representing business
interests with little concerns for
public attitudes or public safety as
long as the public remains passive and
obedient frightened by concocted ogre's
security is to be sure prime concern
security of power and profit not
security the population marginal concern
these have never been small problems and
that's particularly true right now so
let me end by stressing again what we
should all know very well we now face
the most ominous decisions in human
history there are many problems of the
world
but two are overwhelming and their
significance environmental destruction
and nuclear war for the first time in
history we face the prospects of
destroying the possibility for decent
existence and not in the distant future
and for this reason alone it's
imperative to sweep away the ideological
clouds face honestly and realistically
the question of how policy decisions are
made in our societies and what we can do
to alter them before it's too late
well now now to you all I'd like to take
questions in clusters of three so that
we can get a few remarks out I'll take
three from the Great Wall now before we
go to other lecture theatres and bring
them in so I do I see any hands that we
have a roaming mic and you'll need it so
there's a gentleman back there
hi mr. Chomsky Paris Katrina so behalf
of the Greek editorial journal and on
behalf of the xray Greek BBC I have many
questions to ask you can you can you put
the mic just opportunity to away from
your way from a story for the feedback
and you hear me clearly yes thank you I
had many questions to ask you
one one yes one one just one but I chose
one many people I told me to ask you but
I chose the question of a 55 year old
Borman he works the doors here in the
clubs in Newcastle it's a very simple
question and I would like your answer
please sir and this gentleman asked me
why politicians lie okay well that was
that's a straightforward question why
politicians lie yes we'll come back to
that rather brutal question let's just
take from the back anyone let's go right
to the back thank you dr. Chauncey
you talked quite a bit about how
governments seek to perpetuate their own
power even if it's directly against the
interests of their own people and you
listed a bunch of examples about how the
US government has done so through
expanding militarily how important do
you feel is a military industrial
complex where by private corporations
seek to expand and provide military
equipment to the government how
important do you feel that is in causing
this problem do you have that question
it's yeah okay we'll move on it's more
men so far sure we can do better than
that yeah
and I was wondering you talked about the
role of the media in sort of
perpetuating a gap between public
knowledge and scientific knowledge and I
wondered if you thought that you know
the growing force of the Internet and
the power of any person to reach a
worldwide audience might do something to
negate that and to try and improve that
and sort of narrow that gap do you want
to put that into a short question gone I
wondered if you thought that through the
internet people might be able to narrow
the gap between scientific knowledge and
the internet narrow the gap between you
know ideology and knowledge as it were
all right let's take those three to
begin with I think that that relates to
the first question why politicians lie
the simple answer is because we let them
we have the power to prevent it but if
you don't use the power if you sit back
and say I don't care then they'll lie
and they have good reasons to I mean
would it make sense for Tony Blair say
to stand up now and say please set up a
war crimes tribunal to try me for the
for the supreme international crime of
aggression would that make sense or for
him to say please throw me out of my
position as Special Representative for
the Middle East quartet because I'm
doing absolutely nothing for peace but
enriching myself or would it make sense
for and you can run down the line now
there's very good reasons either to lie
or just not to tell the truth if
politicians told the truth I think you
decide for yourselves I think they would
be saying what I was just talking about
they would be saying we don't care at
all about your security or your safety
or your survival we care about our power
and about the power of the concentrated
concentrated domestic power which in our
societies means basically the corporate
sector that's not a hundred percent the
case of course
but it will be you know the strong
tendency for it to be the case for the
people who reached the top that's how
they reach the top but the real answer
is we let them and that's our that's up
we film about ourselves no good the look
into the mirror can the Internet help
it's one of the ways in which the
general population that can try to
counter the extraordinary power of of
concentrate mostly concentrated economic
power but again only if you use it and
you could say this is it's true whether
there's an Internet or not I'm the
Internet as offer some new meant new
options it also offers new options for
controlling and suppressing technology
pretty much tends to be neutral you can
use it the liberate you can use it to a
press and the answer to which happens is
in our hands the military-industrial
complex that's of course Eisenhower's
phrase interestingly his phrase when he
left office after having created through
his eight years a huge
military-industrial complex
I can't honestly complain about it
that's one of the reasons I have a job
teach at MIT which is right at the
center of it
1950s and 60s practically the whole
academic budget was paid by the Pentagon
but that tells you something there was
almost no military work in fact the only
military work on campus was in the
political science department political
science department had something called
a Peace Research Institute and anyone
who read or will knows exactly what that
means
it was an Institute working on
counterinsurgency and Vietnam and other
such benign actions but outside the
political science department there was
no military work on campus but it was
funded by the Pentagon and that tells
you something about the Pentagon and the
so-called military-industrial complex
that is kept quiet the Pentagon in the
United States and comparable systems
here and elsewhere are - they have a
military function but they also have
another function they create the economy
of the future they are systems by which
taxpayers are misled as Huntington says
you have to create misimpressions
taxpayers are misled to create for
profits of corporations for the future
you have mostly have save iPhones or
something like that in your pocket take
a look at them they for example they
have in the GPS where the GPS come from
it's created by the US Navy the Navistar
program that has micro electronics
software hardware created almost all
created for decades well mostly in the
state sector under often in the u.s.
Pentagon funding here the counterpart
taxpayers pay for this because they
think they're protecting their security
that's what they're told but in fact the
government doesn't care about your
security what it cares of is about its
own power and security for corporate
power and the way the system works is
the taxpayer takes the risks carries out
the investment for decades literally
decades finally something may come out
which is profitable and then the profit
goes to the private sector if if we had
anything remotely like capitalist
systems we don't they would they would
adhere
the capitalist principle that if an
investor takes risks and you know
invests and waits and picks worse key
steps and if something comes out of it
the profit goes back to the investor
that's not the way it works here the
profit goes the people had nothing to do
with it the risks are taken by you often
through the Pentagon and comparable
systems and if anything comes out the
profits go to Microsoft and Apple now
they didn't create it they bar they take
it it's given to them and it literally
is decades so computers were the first
the computer market personal computer
market became viable in 1977 I think it
was Apple was the first that was about
30 years after the development of
computers almost all in the state sector
like in the building where I work and
it's the said if you buy pharmaceuticals
let's say the research the basic
research and development is pretty much
done in the state sector the place is
like probably the biology lab right here
probably gets government funding grants
and that's all across the board when you
look back at these I mentioned the
trans-pacific partnership one part of
that was leaked by WikiLeaks it's secret
except for the corporate lawyers and
lobbyists but one part was leaked it was
not the part on intellectual property
intellectual property is a polite term a
kind of a euphemism for government
instituted monopoly pricing rights
that's what it really means
it means extraordinarily high patent
rights which have never existed in
history for the pharmaceutical
corporations and some other corporations
that's to keep the price of drugs up and
make profits astronomical now there's a
pretext of the pharmaceutical
corporation say look we need that for
research and development
that's been investigated turns out that
it's probably at least half of the R&D
is not done by the pharmaceutical
corporations at all
it's done by the state sector and so on
and that's an under estimate because if
you take a close look the part but
stunned by the pharmaceutical
corporations is towards the marketing
end like you know flip around the
molecule to get a new drug but the basic
research the hard costly risky research
that's done by people like you you pay
for it through your taxes and the
pharmaceutical corporations rip off the
profit actually there is a study by a
one study by a very good American
economist Dean Baker who suggested and
what would happen if R&D was a hundred
percent funded by the public and the
pharmaceutical corporations were
compelled to go on the market to sell
what they produce it turns out that be a
colossal saving for the public and of
course a sharp reduction in profits of
the big industries that's intellectual
property that's the part of the
trans-pacific partnership that was
leaked but going back to the
military-industrial complex it's a kind
of a misleading term it really refers to
most of the advanced economy which in
our societies is substantially state
based and instantly that goes back
hundreds of years you take a look at
British economic development it wasn't
through the market it was through
powerful state intervention same with
the United States same with Germany
Japan France every developed society
Asian Tigers and so on well we have a
few questions already from elsewhere so
here I'll just edit them apologies to
those whose questions are not read out
you'll get this quite quickly how long
before the chickens come home - how long
before the chickens come home to roost
is one question another one is the late
Robert ow argued but we live in a
polyarchy not a democracy do you agree
and the final question I all mentioned
here is that the IPC IPCC wrote recently
that climate change mitigation is
unachievable if individual agents
advanced own interests independently do
you agree well we know the answer to
that question
I'll say it anyway the first then the
third question are pretty similar
according to the IPCC the study the
studies that followed it I quote quoted
a couple of them the chickens are coming
home to roost already and they're gonna
it's going to be pretty serious within a
generation or two very serious I mean it
just imagine what a 10-foot rise in sea
level would be most cities would be gone
the real danger the pasture fee would be
for the poor as always
so Bangladesh for example is a coastal
plain is millions tens of millions of
people we wiped out what kind of
civilization could survive a rise of ten
feet and sea level just ask yourselves
and that's within sight you know your
grandchildren it's not that far is a
change but evil technically yes but is
it feasible as the question and whether
it's feasible or not goes back to your
decisions will people make decisions
that will do what ought to be done most
of the fossil fuels ought to stay in the
ground just as Ecuador proposed
and efforts should be made to develop
alternatives now that's not
inconceivable I mentioned Germany the
Germany's on a path to get to about 70%
sustainable energy within a short term
now that might be impeded if you read
the us business press they're very
excited now about the fact that thanks
to enormous use of fossil fuels in the
United States energy prices are going
down in the United States and that will
make the European manufacturing
uncompetitive and therefore Europe will
have to back off on its conservation
measures that's a great thing because
then we'll make even more profit and the
steps that are taken towards saving our
grandchildren will be a drop off that is
the moral calculus of an anglo-american
state capitalism we should recognize
that but it is technically feasible
there are all sorts of other
possibilities that can be exploited but
not without decisions and if decisions
are left in the hands of state and
private power there is no reason to
expect any immiseration of this it's
just getting worse like the quotes from
Obama that I read polyarchy Polly Ark is
a it's kind of a play I think he's
basically right but why not simply say
it it's a pact recei the very rich make
decisions in their own interests and
most of the population is irrelevant
actually it's worse in Europe than in
the United States Europe what's happened
in Europe in the past 10 or 20 years is
just astonishing I mean even the Wall
Street Journal is astonished they
pointed out recently in an article that
which is correct that in Europe no
matter what government is elected you
know far left far right anything else
follow exactly the same policies because
they have no role in setting policy the
policies are set in the and by the
bureaucrats and Brussels under the
shadow of the Bundesbank
so it doesn't matter what people think
in fact there are some dramatic
illustrations of that couple years ago
the Greek Prime Minister Papandreou
meekly suggested that maybe there should
be a referendum in Greece so that people
could say whether they had wanted to
accept the policies that were being
dictated through them he was denounced
across the spectrum
everybody denounced him is totally crazy
a happen you dare ask the population
that what policies ought to be in Europe
we know that policies have to be set by
the bureaucrats and the bankers
polyarchy isn't probably the right term
for that are you ok for one more round
of questions alright let's just see what
we can find
[Music]
I'm afraid my choices are gonna be
pretty arbitrary thank you
my questions about your final statement
you said something like we have to face
our two major problems and consider what
we can do to avoid destruction think
about what we can do what would you
advise we do when we leave this room
because I feel quite what would you
advise practically yes given given what
you have talked about and the imminence
this century as it were disaster would
you advise people to do all right
let's bet some
you mentioned that the richest countries
in the world are amongst those who most
disregard the true security of their
people in place of the interests of the
wealthy and the powerful however it
could be argued that the poorest
countries in the world are doing exactly
the same thing how can we explain the
explain these differences in fortune
given that each seems to pursue similar
policy strategies and is it a question
of balance do you want to put that in a
slightly simpler way don't read it
just saying the richest and the poorest
countries in the world each seem to
disregard the the true security of their
people yet they seem to experience
completely different fortunes how can we
explain this yeah is that clear good
let's just try and take a few more
because this will be the last cluster go
on rich at random in any talk you talked
mainly about the US and about Europe but
like what do you think about the rise of
China in terms of like you know the the
futures right right you said sure all
right I think we'll have to we'll just
all I'll just take one last question
over there and then we have to stop can
I ask you a personal question how do you
square having your views by working in
MIT oh that's easy
all right but as a PhD since I got my
PhD from MIT declare a conflict of
interest here I've got a last question
for you which is this how do you imagine
democracy the shape and form of a
democracy that would be open pluralist
responsive it would have to be a very
different kind of democracies to
standard electoral short term
competitive democracy but we also know
that forms of direct democracy produce
their own internal difficulties so the
question is when you imagine a world
beyond as it were a state capitalism and
competitive elite
democracy what do you imagine okay let
me run through them in order the first
question is as individuals what can we
do the answer is practically nothing
what what could be done and always has
been done in history is by people who
are organized organized groups the labor
movement civil rights movement women's
movement anti-war movement environmental
movements these can do things but if and
that's one of the reasons why powerful
systems are so intent on atomizing
people it's a very striking take the now
there's a lot of propaganda about the
wonders of markets actually we only have
very limited markets but there are
markets markets are supposed to be
magnificent because they increase your
choices actually they restrict your
choices you think about it for a minute
suppose I want to get home from work at
night ok the market offers me a choice I
can have a four-door Toyota it does not
offer me the choice of a subway what I
want what's good for me what's good for
the environment what's good for my
children but that's not offered in the
market markets offer individual
consumption and the enormous stress on
the importance of markets is part of the
way to drive people towards looking for
yourself amassing there's many
commodities you can forget everything
else in fact if you think about it for
every one of you is picking an economics
course or read about it then you know
what markets are supposed to be markets
are supposed to be systems in which
informed consumers make rational choices
right I'm sure every one of you has
turned on a television set what do you
see when you turn on a television set
you see that there's a huge
industry public relations industry which
began in the United States and Britain
incidentally huge industry which is
designed to undermine markets every ad
is an attempt to create an uninformed
consumer will make an irrational choice
all right a huge effort on the part of
the business world the undermined
markets but to keep the aspect that's
useful for profit and power namely
separating people from one another
focusing on individual choices not
working with your neighbor so to get
back to what you can do as an individual
not a lot except what's always worked in
the past and can work in the future
the second question pointed out that the
rich and the powerful of the states act
pretty much the same way mostly that's
true not entirely I mentioned the case
of Ecuador which did make an effort to
do with its fossil fuels what ought to
be ought to be done but by and large
it's doubtless true that's why I didn't
really talk about States when I said
these sectors of the world population
that are leading the effort to try to
avert the disaster are not States
they're organized groups they're the
indigenous populations the First Nations
in Canada let's say are not a state
they're the ones who are trying to stop
the tar sands development which is
really lethal in Australia the
Aboriginal people are very battered and
beaten the those who have survived the
onslaught are in the lead and trying to
stop the uranium gold the other mining
in India there's a war going on with the
tribal people trying to protect the
reserves from destruction by
developmental projects you know mining
and so on which will destroy them and
but keep keeping just countries it's
true that you can't expect States to
behave very differently from the way
they in fact do under our general kinds
of organizations and structures but of
course what the powerful states do is
just a lot more significant it doesn't
matter that much what Ecuador does
matters a lot what England in the u.s.
do so that's and that's up to us and
that gets to the next question what
about China China's and it's an
interesting case it's it's a complex
case China in the last China gained
independence in 1949 from 1949 to 1979
about that was roughly the Maoist period
there's a lot of developed there were a
lot of Horrors than a real atrocities
took place a huge famine killed maybe
3040 million people but there are some
interesting things that happen that
aren't discussed very much
there are interesting studies of
comparing China and India it's an
interesting comparison attained
independence same time two huge
countries that both very poor they were
pretty similar in 1949 late 40s and they
developed differently terrain during the
next 30 years the majors one of the
major studies of this is by a leading
economist on March SN Nobel laureate in
economics and specialist on India
he and his associate Jean drehs
economists didn't bail a very good
economists did a study of
the of mortality in China and India
between 1949 and 1979 when China shifted
course turned out in this period
according to their calculation a hundred
million people were killed in democratic
capitalist India as compared with China
because of what India didn't do it
didn't introduce rural reforms health
clinics barefoot doctors affected almost
nothing for the peasant population and
the difference in mortality amounts to a
hundred million people it's a pretty
interesting in itself it's pretty
striking but it's particularly striking
because what was happening in the
propaganda system right at this time a
book came out in France first then
translated in English called the Black
Book of communism which is part of the
huge propaganda onslaught against how
terrible communism wasn't it was pretty
terrible that's true
the book claimed that a hundred million
people had been killed by communism okay
so here we have two studies one of them
says a hundred million people were
killed by the communists the most of it
not based on any date at a much just
thought but let's say it's true another
a careful study saying that one
democratic capitalist country killed a
hundred million people as compared with
China that what was the reaction to the
to the black book of communism and front
page reviews all over articles everybody
knows about it tells us how horrible
communism is the syndra's study I wrote
about it when I Marcus and got the Nobel
Prize I had a lot of interviews and I
tried to convince journalists to mention
it one did
Indian journalists actually mentioned
that you're gonna look pretty hard to
find any reference to it well that's one
fact about China a since China began its
shift towards a kind of a whatever you
call it a state market system there has
been substantial growth mortality on the
other hand is level a health of the
population has not improved barely
improved it so you look at the rates it
went mortality improved very sharply up
till 79 kind of levels off but there's
been a lot of development
China's raised more people out of
poverty than the rest of the world
combined by a long shot in the last
generation or two and China's busy
destroying the environment they now
produce more the the the there are
emissions rates or get total emissions
are now higher than the US they are
making some efforts to cut it back like
China is the world leader in solar panel
production and not just the massive but
even high technology solar panels but
it's a pretty hard slog China still a
very poor country there's a lot of talk
about China taken over the world and so
on but if you look at the actual
measures say Human Development Index and
of the United Nations China's I think
around 90th or something it's extremely
poor country it has enormous internal
problems that the West doesn't have it's
had some spectacular successes many much
of what it's doing is harmful that's we
can't do much about China we can do
something about ourselves but I think we
should be pretty cautious about the
speculations of China become the great
superpower of the future in fact if you
look closely at Chinese Chinese exports
and ask how much value is added in China
you get quite a different picture
of Chinese economic success so like to
say an iPhone if that's exported from
China we call it a Chinese export but
actually the the technology and the the
high technology and the software on the
design mostly come from the peripheral
industrial countries that Japan South
Korea and Taiwan and China ads the
assembly and the west of course which
invests in China it's the thing I don't
remember the numbers of a fan but the
figures are very high the actual value
added in China is pretty slight well
that's going to increase over the years
China's climbing a technology ladder but
it's not a simple path and I think we
should keep those things in mind there's
some good studies of this working at MIT
I don't find a problem with it I don't
have any objection to the fact that
people have computers internet iPhones
and so on
I don't like the way it's done it's been
very undemocratically like people in the
1950s we're not asked do you want your
your taxes to go into a profits for
Apple 30 years from now and maybe an
iPhone for your great-grandchildren or
do you want your taxes to go into a
health education mass transportation
decent Society and so on people weren't
offered that choice the choice they were
told is do you want to be destroyed by
the Russians or not and if you don't
want to be destroyed by the Russians put
the money into the Pentagon as hunting
didn't point it out that was a
misimpression but it's one that did lead
to the economy however this has nothing
to do with MIT you know if I didn't work
at MIT the same thing at that I worked
there because I think it's a great
university I like it they never thought
of going anywhere else but I don't see a
conflict
it's kind of the other way around went
being a place like MIT or being in a
country like England that gives you a
chance to influence policy what you
couldn't do if you were elsewhere that's
significant
so if you have a choice of what country
to live in and you want to try it if
you're interested making it a better
world the best country live in the
United States even it's if it's maybe
the most destructive country in the
world because that's where you can
change policy if you live in the don't
know where Ecuador let's say you can
complain about policy but you can't do
much about it so I don't see that as
much of a conflict
what would a democracy look like well my
own feeling is that thinking about the
various kinds of technical ways in which
representation can take place it don't
really carry us very far almost because
what really matters is what kind of
socio-economic arrangements are there
now here we go back to I think you have
to start with something more fundamental
there plenty of hierarchic relations in
society all kinds from family to
international affairs I think we should
always ask the question wherever there
is such a structure is it legitimate and
and there's a burden of proof it has to
prove its legitimacy it's not
automatically self legitimating so
wherever there's a structure of
authority domination hierarchy
patriarchal family International Affairs
anything in between the question of
legitimacy of the structure arises
sometimes you can justify a structure of
dominance but very rarely and wherever
you can't it ought to simply be
dismantled and that's across the
spectrum
and it can be done in many different
ways so say the the feminist revolution
of the last roughly generation had a big
impact on certain kinds of dominant
structures okay that's quite significant
the worker owned enterprises set the
basis up for a different kind of
economic and political structure and
they exist
as some of them in fact are quite
substantial the Mondragon conglomerate
in Spain is first of all economically
quite successful it's one of the few
parts of the Spanish economy that's
going to survive this austerity
devastating austerity policies but it
also is democratic in a way which
doesn't show up in method of voting and
so on and I think those are kind of the
major factors that have to be looked at
the kinds you mentioned are important
and I don't you could debate exactly how
it could be done but I mean I don't see
how any complex system can avoid some
sort of representative democracy and we
just can't have a vote on everything but
the representatives should be
accountable recallable subject to
constant surveillance and control and
interchangeable and that does have you
know there can be negative aspects to
that but I can't see that much can be
avoided well thank you I mean you've
made an extraordinary contribution as an
academic as a litigation to linguistics
to philosophy to public life for a very
very long time
and the fact that you're here today aged
85 is an extraordinary testament to your
vitality and your energy and your and
the crowd and the number of people that
were excited about your visit is really
striking it was the Twitter excitement
the number of times we were asked for
tickets I've never seen so much passion
arise when we declare that the tickets
are already all gone that was
yuria the gates of the castle and that's
because everybody wanted to get into
here you and we know why so many many
thanks on behalf of everybody here
[Applause]